---
title: 'Notes on Contract Law'
author: Harsh Gupta
...


\newpage
# One Page Summary

* Contracts are promises government will stand behind. For a promise to be
    considered a contract:

    1. There should be an intention to create legal relations
    2. Both parties should be serious about their promise
    3. The contract shouldn't be immoral or illegal
    4. It should be bargain, i.e., both parties should get something in return
       for their promise

* If one party takes another "over the barrel" to enter into a contract then
    the contract is not enforcible.

* A contract based on fraud or lies is not enforcible.

* It is implicit that both the parties are contracting about the same thing, if
    both the parties are mistaken about some important fact on which the
    contract relies then the contract is not enforcible.

* One sided mistakes doesn't make a contract void.

* Unless required by a statute, it is not necessary to put a contract in writing to be considered a valid contract.

* A contract is interpreted not only though its literal interpretation, but
    also by taking its purpose and context in consideration.

* When a party breaches its contractual obligations, the courts can either
    force them to keep their side of the promise (called specific performance)
    or can ask them to pay monetary damages.

* The damages are calculated comparing the would be scenario where the promise
    was kept and where it wasn't.

* When a person (agent) is acting on behalf of someone else (principle), to the
    outside world the principle is liable for actions of the agent.


* In a partnership, all the partners are entitled to the fortunes and liable
    for damages. A corporation is legal invention which allows this abstract
    entity to enter legal relationships as principle, protecting its investors
    and employees from liability.

* In contractual relations between consumers and businesses, often the
    government dictates certain terms of the contract (called regulation). This
    is done to protect consumers as expecting each consumer to negotiate good
    contracts with businesses is neither desirable nor feasible.

\newpage
# Unit 1: Four Principles

## Unit Summary

* Contracts are promises government will stand behind. For a promise to be
    considered a contract:

    1. There should be an intention to create legal relations
    2. Both parties should be serious about their promise
    3. The contract shouldn't be immoral or illegal
    4. It should be bargain, i.e., both parties should get something in return
       for their promise

## Intention to create legal relationships

For promises to considered a contract, there needs to be an intention to create
legal relationships because the court doesn't want to deal with promises which
are personal in nature.

Example: Prof. Fried's former student invites Prof. Fried for a dinner to
impress her boss. Prof Fried accepts the invitation. She (the student) spends a
lot of money and energy in preparations, her boss is also here for the dinner
but Prof. Fried doesn't turn up. Prof. Fried didn't keep his side of the
promise, the former student cannot sue Prof. Fried because such a promise is of
purely personal in nature.

## Both sides serious?

Both the sides should be serious about their promise. For example: Often people
say I'll change my name if X does Y. Now someone cannot go to court to force
that person to change her name because obviously such a promise is a joke.

### Cases

* Lenoard v. Pepsi

## Moral and Legal

* The contract should not be illegal or immoral, for example a promise by
    someone to becomes others slave for a lifetime for a million dollars now
    won't be a legal contract.

## Is it a bargain?

* The promises should be a bargain not a gift. For example: A case where X promises to
    give 20 dollars to Y in return of 10 dollars will be a gift not a bargain
    because X gives something for nothing.


* The bargain need not be a good bargain. So you can exchange things of very
    different values, if:
    * The two things differ sufficiently; say you exchange a 20 dollar note for
        a special 10 dollar note
    * The other party has taken a risk

* What one party gets is called a consideration. What is considered sufficient
    consideration can be very broad. For example, earlier it was argued that
    the GNU GPL License is not enforcible because a software released under GPL
    is simply a gift, but the fact that intention of the person releasing a
    software under GPL is "public good" was considered sufficient
    consideration. (From words of Matilal sir, I need to look up the case law)


\newpage
# Unit 2: One Sided Promises

## Unit Summary

This unit discusses one sided promises in more details and also gives some
specific scenarios where they might be considered valid contracts.

## Option Contracts

Consider the scenario:

Jordan is wood seller and Vivek is furniture maker. Vivek wants to protect
himself against huge price fluctuations, so he goes to Jordan and says "The
price of wood now is 100 Rupees per cubic foot, but it might increase in
October when I might need 100 cubic foot of wood. I don't want to deal with
such fluctuations. Why don't we do this, you promise to keep the rate of wood
at 110 rupees per cubic foot for me in October which is slightly higher than
the market rate now." Jordan agrees.

Is this contract enforcible? No. Because Jordan promises to keep the rate of
wood fixed but doesn't get anything in return. Jordan isn't the only seller of
wood in the area, Vivek doesn't promise to buy wood in October, if the prices
are higher than 110, he can buy from Jordan and if they are lower he can buy it
from someone else. To make such a deal enforcible Jordan can ask Vivek to give
him some fee to keep the price fixed for him. Then the contract will be a
bargain.

In an **option contract**, one party, gets an exclusive option to use a
particular work by a person for a specific period. In return, that person gets
a possibility that work might get used by the other party (published) and a
consideration maybe in form of a lunch, small amount of money or a promise that
work will be considered. Because of the consideration, even though the first
party is free to use or not use the work and only the second party binds
itself, an option contract is not an empty bag.

## Moral Obligation

In Webb v. McGowin: Webb was an employee in a firm owned by McGowin, as part of
his work, he dropped a heavy wood block from ground floor and he saw McGowin
was underneath the place where the block was about to fall, Webb, jumped to
fall with the block and diverted its direction, saving McGowin's life but he
became crippled for life. For his act, McGowin promised Webb $15 per week.
McGowin continued give this "pension" but after he died, McGowin's heir's
refused to give $15 per week to Webb, claiming that McGowin's promise was a
promise to make a gift hence it is not enforcible. McGowin's promise to Webb
was given **after** Webb had saved his life, by making this promise McGowin
gained nothing which he already didn't have. But the courts said McGowin's
heir's had a **moral obligation** to continue giving $15 to Webb.


## Good Faith

Suppose your contract with a marketeer gives the marketeer the exclusive right
to promote your brand in a particular geographic area. Now this situation is
similar to something for nothing example we discussed, because the marketer can
choose to not to promote your brand, but the contract is enforcible because the
marketeer is assumed to act in **good faith**.



## Cases

* Wood v. Lucy, Lady Duff-Gordon
* Webb v. McGowin



\newpage
# Unit 3: Offer and Acceptance

## Unit Summary

The offerer is the master of the bargain.

* * *

Contracts are of following types:

* Promise for Promise: Both the sides promise to do something, and the contract
    is completed when both the parties deliver their promise. Example: I
    promise to give you a pen next month if you give me a notebook next month.

* Promise for Performance: One does something and the other side promises to do
    something in return. The contract is completed when the promising side
    delivers her promise. Example: I promise to give you a pen next month if
    you give me a notebook now.

* Performance for Performance: You do something and I do something in return. Example: I
    promise to give you a pen now if you give me a notebook now.


Contracts come into life through offer and acceptance.

* **Mirror image rule**: To accept an offer, the offeree has to exactly complete his part of the deal. For example: If the buyer says I'll give you this book for 500 rupees, and you say I accept, I'll give you 300. Then the buyer doesn't have to sell you the book at 300, she is obliged to sell you the book at only if you give 500. Though you can make a conter offer and become the new offeree.


* For promise for performance, doing the expected performance is enough to accept the offer. For example: If someone advertises, I'll give anyone 4000 rupess if they find my lost cat Malti, to accept this offer you just need to find the cat Malti and return it to the owner, once you do this, the owner is obliged to pay 4000.

* For an offer to become complete, it need to be accepted within reasonable time, unless the duration in which the offer is explicitly mentioned, the period of acceptance depends on the context. For example: If the book seller says I offer to sell this book for 500, you cannot go 2 years later and say, "here are your 500 give me the book you were selling". Sometimes, you can buy a contract to keep the orginal contract open for a longer amount of time, option contracts we discussed are an example.



\newpage
# Unit 4: Law at Margins

## Unit Summary

In this unit we discussed some of the cases where the courts are willing to
enforce "contracts" even when they don't fulfill the four principles discussed
in Unit 1.


## Charitable Donations and Detrimental Reliance

* People often make promises to make dontations to charitable organizations. By
themselves these promises are contracts because there are promises to make a
gift. Though the charitable organizations would want to be able to rely on such
promises because they have to plan things. There have been many cases where a
person promissed to make some dontation and then he/she died and the their
heirs refused to hold on to that promise becausd they weren't required to. So,
courts in the US made a rule that if the promise is clear enough and well
thought out then the the promise to make this gift is enforcible,


* In many other cases of one sided promise, the benefitting party can seek
damages if they have been **detrimentally relying** on that promise. For
example, in one of the case discussed, an old man promissed to pay his
niece a regular sum of money and relying on which he expected her to quit
her job, which she did. After the old man died his heirs refused to pay the
niece the promissed money. The niece sued and won damages as she was
deterimentally relying on the old man's promise.


* The conditions for deterimental reliance:

    1. The reliance must be reasonable. For example it is unreasonable for you
    to stock up 5 yrs of supply of dog food if I promise to give you a pup next
    month. 2. Hence you cannot sue me for the money you spent on dog food if I
    don't give you the pup.

    2. The reliance must be forseeable. Even if the reliance was reasonable,
       the promisor must know that you might be relying his promise in that
       particular way. Continuing with the dog example, if I promise to give
       you a pup and I expect that relying on that promise you'll buy a month
       worth of dog food. Then if I don't give you the pup, you can sue me for
       the month worth of dog food, not the pup.

## Promises without promise

### Hoffman v. Red Owl

_(The details might not be exact)_ Red Owl was a groceries franchise and
Hoffman was bakery owner, he wanted to own a Red Owl franchise, so he entered
into negotiations with the representatives of Red Owl, they encoraged Hoffman
to get some experience in the grocery business and have $18000 cash ready.
While the neotiations were still on, Hoffman sold his bakery business, brought
a grocery store in a nearby city and ran it for few month. The negotiations
dragged on and finally they didn't conclude as Red Owl demanded much more money
than what Hoffman initially expected. The Hoffman sued. There was no formal
contract or any specific promise, hence no contract was breached, though
Hoffman won damages for all the troble he had gone through because of Red Owl's
encouragement.

### Texaco v. Pennzoil

Similarly in Texaco v. Pennzoil, Pennzoil was in negotiations with Getty Oil to
buy their oil business, though the final details weren't worked out and no
formal contract was signed, Pennzoil and Getty made a press release stating
that an agreement was reached for Pennzoil to buy Getty. While the final
details were still being worked out, Getty stated talking to Texaco and sold
itself to it for a higher prize. Pennzoil sued Texaco for interfering with its
contractual rights and it won. The court said that Getty and Pennzoil had
"agreed in principle" hence they had a contract.

\newpage
# Unit 5: Mistakes

## Unit Summary

In this unit, we discussed what happens when there mistakes in the process of
a contract. Contracts based on mutual mistakes, frauds or lies are not
enforcible, whereas in cases where only one party is mistaken the contract is
enforcible.

## Accidents by both parties; Mutual Mistakes

* The contract needs "meeting of minds".

* Both parties should be contracting about the same thing.

* "Mutual Mistake" -- both parties are mistaken about an important premise of a
    deal

* In case of mutual mistakes, "the deal lies where it falls".


*


## Unilateral Mistakes

* Unilateral Mistake -- contract is valid.

* Case 1: You gambled on a horse and it lost, it was your mistake and you
 cannot say it was a mistake to bet on that horse, I want my money back,
 because it wasn't a mistake from the side of people selling the gamble.

* Case 2: Discussed earlier, both sides are mistakes.

* You need to be careful about exactly what you are contracting about it, in
    the case of the gambler, the contract is about hope/risk that the horse
    will win, both parties knows that, no new fact is revealed when the race is
    over. As Prof Fried said "Where the contract is really about risk and both
    parties know that it's about risk, and they're both guessing, then there is
    no read for the court to let teh party who gambles and looses off the
    hook."

* Things are different in cases where the mistakes are not about risk, for
    innocent mistakes courts allow the mistaken party to call off the deal.

## Fraud/Cheating

In case the person being lied about some important details about the contract,
that person call off the contract.

## Speculation and Insider Trading

* If you don't lie, you can make a deal on private information, you don't have
    to give it away.

## Regulations

* Not everything is a contract. In the misleading advertisement case by Coca
    Cola, POM can sue Coca Cola for unfair competition because it is the one
    who really looses by it.


## Krell v. Henry; Frustation

Krell advertised that for 75 pounds, he will allow anyone to view the
procession of king's coronation from his window. Henry paid 25 pounds in
advanced and promised to pay rest two days before the procession, though before
that the king became ill and the procession was cancelled. Henry refused to pay
the rest. Krell sued to get 50, and Henry paid to sue 25.

Krell's argument: A deal is a deal, he didn't promissed to make the procession happen. Henry can still use his window on the given day. Henry: The basic premise of the deal was that there will be procesion. Court agreed and called the deal off.

To get such results:

* Any party should not be a cause of frustation.
* There should be no clause about frustation in the contract.
* The frustation should be important aspect of completing the contract.
* The parties should not have though that the thing causing the frustation can
    happen.

Suez Canal: The contract was to ship cargo from Texas to Bombay, when the ship
reached Egypt, the gulf war broke out and the Suez Canal was blocked, so the
ship had to take a longer route. The shipping company sued to get the extra
cost, but it lost because the court said that the contract was to get good from
A to B, it is your risk if something like the war happens, also cost isn't hell
lot only 1/3 of the original cost. If it were 10 times or something then things
are different.

* "Commercially impracticability"

* Other examples; An actor dies during production of a movie, or music hall
    burns down while a contact for concern is in play and such example, the
    deal is off. Often parties takes insurance for such cases.

* Force Majoure -- A clause about major unhappening, the clause specific the
    default rule, usually it is the the deal is off

* These things are about risks which the contract is not about, in magnitude or
    nature.

* In cases where only one party claims surprise, the deal is not called off.



## Practical Lessons

* Keep the contract explicit, if you anticipate some unexpected event, put it
    in the contract.

* The contract is based on fraud or lie, you can call the contract off.

## Cases:

* Wichelhaus v. Raffles

* Rose of Aberlone

* Laidlaw v. Organ

* Krell v. Henry



\newpage
# Unit 6:

* A contract doesn't have to be in writing to be binding.

* Informal reasons to put contract in writing:
    * People think it is important or required
    * It shows that they are serious
    * It shows that they have stopped negotiating

* There is often a fight between the literal meaning of the words and their
    purpose and context.

* When the court decides what a phase means, it should be interepreted not only
    its present circumstance but also what does it mean taking the whole statue
    in consideration.

* There is mutual aim for a contract, the contract needs to be interpreted in
    its aim.

* Contract is a cooperative act, the duties needs to be carried out in good
    faith.

## Twin Tower Case

When buying an insurance there is usually a lower limit of the claim you can
ask for and an upper limit and the limits are defined "per occurance" of some
incident. In 9/11 two planes had hit the twin towers with difference of 18
minutes. Would that be considered one occurance or two occurances. The "owner"
of the building had multiple insurance policies, in some word "occurance" was
defined and in others it wasn't. In the cases where it wasn't defined the word
"occurance" was open to interpretation.

## Fried Frozen Foods

THere was a settlement where one party (investor) had an option to get $7500 * (x - $7)
where x is the price of a share on a particular date.

Before the date, the company did a reverse stock split, where they combined
multiple stocks to make a bigger stock. Now the value of a single stock was
large $20, so the investor claimed their settlement for 13*7500 dollars.

The court interpreted in the terms that the point of such a contract was for
the investor to participate in the growth of the company, stock reverse split
is only a paper change so that doesn't entitle you to anything.


## Painter Example

The contract between a builder and painter is that she will get 2$ per square
foot. Now you have a wall with windows and doors, you can interpret it in such
a way that builder only pays per square feet of paint, but custom is that the
amount of calculated by multiplying length and breadth, she uses less paint but
she has to be more careful in painting around the openings so it is a
reasonable compromise.

So the context is important in determining what do the words 2 dollar per
square feet mean.

## New York Example

The parties needs to act in good faith. For every promise there is an implicit
promise that the parties will not hinder each in performing their obligations.

## Mistake, Frustration and Interpretation

In all the examples we talked about in the mistakes section, the mistakes is
dependent on what was the purpose of the contract and hence it is also an
question of interpretation.


## Practical Lessons

* If you think the other party might want to interpret a particular word in
    their benefit, define it in the contract, though don't try to be too
    clever.

## Unit Test: Short Answer

### Question

    Last year, Hollywood Production Studios released Carwreck, featuring
    comedian Jamie Jumer. When negotiating the filming of Carwreck, the parties
    included the following clause in the contract: “If the partnership between
    Hollywood Production Studios and Jamie Jumer is successful, both parties
    agree to begin filming a sequel in 2017.” The movie was critically
    acclaimed and exceeded box office predictions. Jumer, who was relatively
    new to the comedy scene, became a household name. Despite her laidback
    comedic tone, Jumer was difficult to work with. She frequently argued with
    the director and oftentimes failed to show up for filming. After the buzz
    surrounding Carwreck died down, Jumer contacted Hollywood Production
    Studios to inquire when filming for the sequel would begin. Because of the
    difficulties with working with Jumer in the first movie, the production
    company does not want to film a second movie.

    This question has three parts. (1) First, assume you are representing
    Hollywood Production Studios. What would you argue for your client? (2)
    Next, make the case for the other side—what are the best arguments
    supporting Jumer? (3) Finally, explain which argument you find more
    persuasive. Are there any potential facts that would bolster your
    conclusion? You may find it helpful to draft a definition of the term
    successful.


### Response

(1) The clause in the contract to make a sequel of Carwreck is not enforcible because it was conditional on the fact that the partnership between Hollywood Production Studios and Jamie Jumer is successful. Irrespective of the commercial aspects of the series, it is implicit that the partnership can only be considered successful if both parties work well with each other, a partnership where one party is not cooperative with the other party cannot be considered a successful partnership. The fact that Jumer often didn't show up for filming shows her lack of cooperation.

(2) By not working towards the sequel of Carwreck, Hollywood Production Studios have breached their contractual obligation. The contract for Carwreck clearly stated that both parties agree to begin filing a sequel in 2017 if the partnership was successful. The fact that Carwreck exceeded critical acclamation proves that the partnership was successful.

(3) I find the argument from the side of Hollywood Production House more persuasive. The argument from Jumer's side focuses on the literal interpretation of the work "successful partnership", though taking the production context in picture, given Jumer's behaviour the partnership cannot be considered successful. Moreover it would unfair to force Hollywood Production Studio to produce a sequel because that will be saying Jumer can behave whatever way he wants but Hollywood Production House will have to create the sequel anyhow. If it were known that Jumer acted the way she didn't even though she knew that it will cause considerable trouble to the production house, then it can be said that she acted in bad faith and hence the contract is unenforcible.


# Unit 7:

* Specific Performance -- Do X or go to jail
* Damages -- You are only entitled to your expectation. The expectation comes
    from what the deal was.
    "the victim of the breach is entitled to what he would have got if the promise was kept"
* Detrimental Reliance

* Usually the court asks to pay money, not specific performance.

* Why damages in money:
    * Keeps things simple
    * Forcing people to do something might lead to a dead weight loss

* Court don't want to get into the reasons of why you didn't keep your part of
    your promise.

* In case of real estate contracts, the court usually the asks the breacher to
    deliver the peice of property.

* Damages are restricted to amount that can be established with certainty, for
    example if you loose $1000 by some breach, and you say that I would have
    invested that in Mutual Funds for 40% gain, then you have to prove that you
    certainly would have invested that money in mutual funds.

## Example:

* I and a seller had a deal where I promised to pay $500 for a desk and the
    dealer promised to deliver the desk.

Case 1: He delivers the desk and I don't pay. He sues and he can ask for
damages of $500 as that was deal, he cannot claim that the desk was worth $750,
or I cannot claim that the desk was worth $250

Case 2: I paid but he doesn't deliver. If the desk the worth $750 and I can
prove it, then I can ask for $750 for damages.

(There is an assmetry here, the seller always gets $500 but the buyer can get
more)

* Me and the seller had a deal for a desk for $500, I promised to send him a cheque and he
    promissed to deliver the desk when he gets it. I never give him the cheque:

Case 1: He sues me for $500, gets the money and deliver the desk
Case 2: Because he had to hold the desk for me and then the business goes down
and he had to sell it for $250 to someone, he can sue me for $250
Case 3: He sells the desk for $750 to someone, he cannot sue me for anything,
because in that case he'll have to deliver the desk to me.

* John Wonder had a deal with Groves that he'll use his land for a certain
* period of time and will pay him $105K and will return the land in a good
    condition. He paid the amount, used the land but didn't fix it. Now two way
    to calculate damages: Fixing the land will increase its value only by $13K
    Fixing the land will cost $60K

* Similar case: PP family leased out there land to a coal company, the promise
    was that a certain amount of money, they'll return the land in fixed
    condition
    Fixing the land will increase its value only by $300
    Fixing the land will cost $2500

* The value on the market might be way less than what it is worth to me.

Mr. X had a exhibition of his invention to generate interest about it in the
market, he hired a shiping company to deliver his intevention to the place by a
particular date, but they were too late.

"We have no way to know wether your invention would have been successful or
not, we have no way to know that, We'll compensate you for the money you spent
to get that chance of success, i.e., the money you spent on hotel, flight
tickets, your time and your assistant's time"

(Stray thought: THere are so many "inefficiencies in Indian system because it
is soo hard to enforce a contract or seek damages")

## Cases

Groves v. John Wonder

Lumley v. Gye

Hector Martinez Co. v. Southern Pacific Transport

## Question

Penalties v. Damages?

## Non-Compete Clause and Specific Performance

Case: Lumley hired Johana Wagner to sing at his Opera house, Gye came in
offered Wagner more money and convinced her to sing at HIS Opera house. Lumley
sued, the argument was that Wagner was someone unique and damages cannot fix
that, also he'll loose a lot in competition. The court didn't force Wagner to
perform at the Opera but it forbade Wagner from performing anywhere in London
for a season. This is negative specific performance.

Reasons for not forcing a specific performance in this case:
* It is complicated (lot of oversight needed)
* Great intrusion on personal liberty of person
* Might be unconstitutional in some countries

In high tech fields there is usually a non compete clause in employee contract
where the employee is forbidden from joining a competitor for X months.

Issues with non compete:
* Employee is forced to work for a particular company for too long.
* It creates issues for competition


## Assignment: Damages and Specific Performance Short Answer

### Question


    Three summers ago, Brenda and Bart Buyers went to the home of Sarah and Sam
    Sellers in the Washington, D.C. suburb of Bethesda, Maryland. The Buyers
    were interested in purchasing the house as they were planning to move to
    the Washington area from their prior residence in Chicago. The Sellers, for
    their part, were interested in selling as they planned to move from the
    Washington area to a small town outside of Boston; Sarah and Sam had both
    accepted new jobs in Boston, and they discussed their new job plans with
    the Buyers when they first visited.

    On June 18th, the Buyers offered to purchase the home for $500,000, and the
    Sellers accepted. The agreement was finalized in a document called the
    Contract of Sale. The Contract said that the closing date (that is, the day
    when the homebuyer pays the contract price to the seller and the seller
    gives possession of the home to the buyer) would be August 1st. At the time
    the Contract was signed, the Buyers paid a $10,000 deposit to the Sellers.
    Included also in that Contract was an addendum, which provided:

    A. Sale of the Home shall be contingent upon Buyers obtaining an expert
    inspection indicating that the heating system of Home (and all fixtures and
    appliances relating to said heating system) shall be in good working
    condition, and that no major repairs are needed to correct any condition in
    the heating system.

    As we would expect, the Buyers hired an expert to inspect the heating
    system. The expert performed the inspection on July 12th, and he turned up
    something concerning. He found evidence that the property contained an old
    underground oil tank, perhaps used as part of the home’s heating many years
    before. It was not, however, attached to the home’s current systems at all
    and was instead buried some distance away from the house itself.

    Mr. Buyers, however, apparently had environmental concerns about the
    underground tank. Despite the inspector telling him that the underground
    tank should be of no concern and that was certainly not part of the
    “heating system” of the home, Mr. Buyers refused to go forward with the
    home purchase as scheduled on August 1st. Before saying that the sale was
    off, Mr. Buyers bought a special metal detector for $700, intending to use
    that to investigate the underground tank himself.

    Meanwhile, the Sellers were planning their move to Boston. On July 10th,
    they rented a home in Cambridge (just across the river from Boston); they
    were to take possession of the rental house on July 28th and live in it
    until they could purchase a new home in that area. They also made some
    repairs to their home in Bethesda: the front curb was repaired ($1,200) and
    the lights in the bathroom were rewired ($150).

    So on August 1st, the sale was not finalized, as Mr. Buyers stringently
    said it could not be given the tank situation. Instead of moving to Boston,
    the Sellers decided to remain in their home in Bethesda until it sold to
    someone else, even though their new jobs were starting in Boston. The home
    did sell to someone else on May 15th of the next year (over 10 months
    later). The new purchase price was $476,000. This sale came after the
    Sellers worked tirelessly to sell the house to someone else; they showed it
    over 50 times and incurred $600 in costs to provide refreshments to the
    visitors seeking to view the house.

    Between August 1st and May 15th, the Sellers made several repairs to their
    home, to try to make it more appealing to new buyers. First of all, they
    had the underground tank removed ($5,000) and did some other work inside
    the home (totaling $2,500).

    Having decided to remain in Bethesda, the Sellers paid $4,000 to get out of
    their lease in Cambridge and to avoid a dispute with that landlord. They
    both commuted to Boston for work (after all, their new jobs would not
    wait), returning to Bethesda on the weekends. For the period from August
    1st to May 15th, the total amount of their commuting costs was $21,000.

    Had the Buyers paid the purchase price on August 1st as planned, the
    Sellers planned to put the proceeds into a mutual fund account managed by
    National American. The funds in that account would earn a return for a
    while as the Sellers house hunted in Boston and lived in the rental house,
    and the return would allow them to spend a little more on their new home.
    As it turned out, the mutual fund that they planned to use skyrocketed in
    value between August 1st and May 15th, gaining 40% for those invested in
    it. Of course, the Sellers did not get that return as they never received
    the money they planned to put into it.

    Eventually, later in the year after the house sold to the new purchasers,
    the Sellers sued the Buyers for not purchasing the house as agreed on
    August 1st. The court determined that the Buyers had breached the contract
    and that the underground tank problem was no excuse. As such, the court was
    forced to determine a remedy to attempt to make the Sellers whole.

    A Judge's Ruling:

    The court has decided that the Sellers should recover for both 1) the
    cancelled lease and for 2) their commuting expenses between Bethesda and
    Boston. The judge has asked you to write a paragraph explaining each
    decision to include in her opinion for the court. Write your draft below.
    Drafts should contain 2 paragraphs and be no longer than 800 words.

### Response

Given the facts of the cases it is established that The Buyers have breached
the contract to buy the house being sold by The Sellers. The remedy to The
Seller should try to make for the difference between the situation where the
contract was kept and where it wasn't. The Seller should recover the cancelled
lease because this cost wouldn't have occurred had The Buyers had kept their
side of the contract. Similarly, The Sellers are entitled to their commuting
expenses between Bethesda and Boston because it wouldn't have occurred had the
house was sold on August 1.

The Sellers are not entitled to the interest on difference because there is no
certainly that The Sellers would have invested that money in mutual funds. They
are also not entitled to repair expenses because they might have occurred even
if the The Buyers had kept their part of the contract.


## Unit 7: Part 2 Third Parties


Case: Amy buys a bike for $5000 from Zavier on credit, Amy sells another bike
to Brad for $5000 on a promise that he'll deliver the money next week. Now
instead of passing on the money herself, she can ask Amy to sign a contract to
pay the money to Zavier instead.

Amy: Promissee
Brad: Promissor
Zavier: Third Party Beneficiary

Earlier, Zavier would have to sue Amy and Amy had to sue Brad, if both wins
their suits, then Amy will get $5000 from Brad, and Zavier will win $5000 from
Amy which is equivalent for Zavier getting $5000 from Brad.

Now the US courts allow Zavier to sue Brad directly.

Complications:
* Brad might be broke, in that case Zavier can sue Amy to get his part of the
    damages.
* Thing can get complicated if there is some issues with Amy's part of the
    contract with Brad.


If Amy doesn't own anythign to Zavier and Amy's contract with Brad says that
pay $5000 to Zavier for exchange of bike, then Zavier can sue Brad, he cannot
sue Amy if she changes her mind, because in effect the contract between Zavier
and Amy is a contract to make a gift.


## Bank cheque as contract

Bank owes me my money, I owe X some money. So I write a cheque to X. The cheque
is a contract between me and the bank for the benefit of third party.

This was also discussed in debt, that's how money is created. A bank note is
also a promise from the bank to pay me some money, and I can give that note to
someone else to collect that money instead, and that person can give it to
someone else.


## Chains of Contract

Here is an example given in a home work question:

    Mary Jones lived in the City of Langdell for her entire life. Her entire
    family lived there and died there, and Mary intended to be buried in a
    serene plot of the Langdell Cemetery when she eventually passed away.

    Unfortunately for Mary, that time came far sooner than expected. While she
    was vacationing in East Dakota, Mary died, miles and miles away from her
    home and family in Langdell. Distraught but determined to get dear Mary’s
    remains back to Langdell, Mary’s children and other heirs contacted
    Langdell’s finest funeral home, Omega Funerals. Omega agreed to arrange for
    Mary’s return as part of its package for funeral services. The agreement
    between Omega and Mary’s children was made into a formal written contract
    and signed by the parties.

    Omega, in turn, contacted a shipping company in East Dakota. The shipping
    company—Diamond Transportation—contracted with Omega to transport Mary’s
    remains from the facility where she was housed in East Dakota to Omega’s
    facility in Langdell.

    Given that East Dakota was so distant from Langdell and since Diamond
    Transportation had no trucks that would soon be traveling in the direction
    of Langdell, it decided to pay for a commercial airline to fly Mary’s
    remains to the Langdell International Airport, where Omega would take over
    the process. As it had done many times before, Diamond secured a spot for
    Mary in the cargo bay of a National Airlines flight, specifically National
    Airlines flight 3201 from East Dakota Regional Airport to Langdell
    International Airport. A representative of Diamond delivered Mary to the
    airport and there signed on Diamond’s behalf National Airlines’ standard
    Contract of Carriage and Agreement to Ship.

    In yet another unfortunate twist, National loaded Mary onto the wrong
    plane. Instead of being flown directly to Langdell, where her funeral
    service would be held shortly thereafter, she was instead flown on a series
    of flights to the cities of Ames, Thayer, Pound, Landis, and Griswold,
    before she finally arrived in Langdell three days later than expected.

    After the funeral was finally held and an appropriate period of grieving
    had passed, Mary’s family decided that someone needed to pay for the
    extremely disturbing incident of her remains arriving days later than
    expected.

A contract with B, B's contract with A depends on its contract with C, C
contract with B depends on its contract D, so on and so forth. Things go well
till the time they go well, but when something goes wrong, boom!

A sues B, B sues C, C sued D

D's promise might have been small, but it cause big damage to A.

## Unit Test

Question:

    Clayton is a resident of Cambridge, Massachusetts. The City of Cambridge
    has a contract with Waterworks, Inc. Under that contract, Waterworks must
    supply high-pressure water and pump that water into the fire hydrants
    throughout Cambridge.

    One night, Clayton has an incident in his kitchen, and his house begins to
    burn. Fortunately, though, the fine firemen of the local fire department
    show up to the house in plenty of time to prevent any significant damage.
    But there is one big problem: the only water coming from the hydrant is a
    slow trickle, barely more than a drip.

    Without any good source of water, the firemen are unable to do anything
    about the fire, and the entire house burns down. Clayton, who is now both
    furious and homeless, decides to sue Waterworks based on a third-party
    beneficiary theory. He argues that the citizens of Cambridge were the
    intended beneficiaries of the high-pressure water contract made between the
    City and Waterworks.

    How should the suit come out? Should Clayton be able to collect from
    Waterworks for the damages he incurred from the house fire?

    Please state your position and give a reason, then move on to the next
    step.


I believe Clayon should be able to sue Waterworks for the damages as a Third Party Beneficiary.

Assuming no other law applies to the situation and Clayton is a tax paying citizen, a part of Clayton's taxes goes to The City of Cambridge, in return he expects to receive municipality services, this include services from the fire department. Because the fire department failed to deliver their part of the bargain, Clayton should be sue The City of Cambridge. Now, because Waterworks Inc. failed to deliver their contractual obligation with The City of Cambridge, the city should be able to sue Waterworks Inc. Hence, to prevent these double law suits, Clayon should be able to sue Waterworks Inc. directly as a third party beneficiary.


## Question

Can I sue Reliance Industries if they fuck with my power supply? Can the
government sue Reliance Industries if they fuck with power supply? Can I force
the government to sue Reliance if they fuck with my power supply?



# Unit 8:


* Assignment of Contracts
* Agency and corporation

## Assignment

### Video 1

* Barter: The items needs to be exchanged then and there, needs "double
    coincident"
* Money: Change money for a good, then buy the required good from soneone else.
* Credit: If I don't have money now but hopes to get it later, I can give a
    promise, a contract to pay later.

Example: Sohan buys Sandals from Mohan with a promise to pay $100 in October.
Dead weight loss avoided as we are able to make a deal. Now Mohan needs money
now, so he can sell the contract to Betty banker $90 now, another dead weight loss
avoided as gets the money now and the banker is okay to give it as she makes
$10 in October when she gets the money.

### Video 2

Ihe above example, Mohan is an **obligor**, Sohan is **obligee** he is also an
**asignor** in his assignment of Sohan's contract to Betty who is the
**assignee**

### Video 3: Risks

Risks:

* Death of party

* One parties side of a contract could be contest by the other

* Bankrupcy

* You get lost

In case of delays from Mohan, Sohan and Mohan might have reached a compromise
if it was between just two of them, because they are old friends. Now when the
Banker is involved, the banker is probably a complete stranger to them and she
will probably not be willing to compromise. In the end, the professor asks,
"What if everyone digs in their heels?"

I posted the following in the discussion forum:

    If everyone digs in their heels then it can lead lot of dead weight loss.
    For example, in this case if it is know that people like Betty Banker are
    very uncompromising and she might sue the promisor even for delay of few
    days and it is know that the sandal maker might assign the contract to the
    banker. Then the boot maker will be less willing to offer promise of $100
    in October in exchange for sandals, because with exchange of promise will
    also come with a risk of being sued for small delays (which is costly)
    hence it is likely that there will be no deal. The boot maker will not be
    able to enjoy the beach, the sandal maker will not get boot in October or
    even November and the banker will loose the opportunity to make 10 dollars.
    It is a dead weight loss.

This reminds me the discussion from the book "Debt the first 5000 years", where
the author said that one of the reason for the ruthless cruelty of the
colonialists from Europe was that they were under debt and they had to get
money someway or other, their debtors won't be compromising, so they cannot be
compromising either.


### Video 4 and Video 5

Remember in the original contract between Mohan and Sohan was for the exchange
of sandals. Now when Betty Banker comes to Sohan in october to collect $100,
Sohan can claim that Mohan didn't keep his part of the bargain as the sandals
were worthless, which is a valid defence. Betty banker shouldn't have to deal
with all this because it increases her risk.

So the contract between Mohan and Sohan can be more general, he can say "I'll
pay you $100 in October" that's it, it is called a promisory note. Betty Banker
is more likely to accept it in exchange of $90 and hence Mohan is more likely
to accept it for credit. Then the prof discussed how it is similar to bank
notes. In fact that's how paper notes came to be, they are promises to pay a
debt to someone. The British notes came to be when the Bank of England gave a
large some of money ot the government and circulated the debt notes saying
"take this 1 pound from the government"

The unconditional contract to pay is also called negotiable instrument


## Agency

### Video 1 and 2

Situation: Prof Fried is an antique glass collector, he wants to participate in
an auction in another city but he cannot personally go there to buy a bottle he
might be interested in, and he is willing to pay upto $50 for that, possibilities:

* He can send a fixed bid of $50 dollars, but might overpay as the final prize
    might be 30
* He can participate through phone, but it is hard to judge thing over phone.
* He can ask a friend, Xena, in that city to partcipate in an auction on his behalf
    for a fee of $5, this friend is called an agent.

### Video 3

Now assume Xena breaks by bottle after she buys it at auction, can Prof Fried
demand the money back from the auctioneer? No, things also don't change if the
auctioneer knows that Xena is agent and is not buying on her behalf.

## Partnership and Corporations

### Video 1: From Agency to Partnership


* Law Firms usually acts as partnership, so do many other organizations.

* In a partnership each partner is both a principle and an agent for the
    partnership, any advantage is incurred to the whole partnership and same
    goes for losses.

### Video 2: From Partnership to Corporation

In partnership the investing people have lot of liability, they might loose too
much. So a bunch can come together, put money in a "black box" and the "black
box" acts as a principle to the outside world. Its liability doesn't extend to
the investors. All the investors can loose is their investments.


### Video 3: Governments and Corporates

Prof Fried talks about how governments creates corporations. In a partnership
the agents and the principles are real people,  you can say this group of
people forms the partnership. In a corporate there is nothing tangible that you
can call a corporate, the investors aren't a corporate, the employees aren't a
corporate, teh building isn't a corporate, all this together is not a
corporate. A corporate is an abstract entity and it exists  because government
allows it and recognizes its relationship and contracts with other entities.
Though government does it in its own terms, it regulate the corporate in
several ways and in certain cases it might allow the people hurt by the
corporate to sue the people behind the corporate wall.

This is a very interesting, I wonder the nature of finance and commerce before
the state became so big and so strong. Corporates couldn't exist back then,
there was no great way to enforce a contract back than other than causing
reputational damage, that's why it is said that reputation by itself is worth a
lot of business, before the big government why would someone deal with a
corporate, who would they go after if somethign goes wrong? Well corporates
still do exist and still operate in countries where government is very weak,
say Somalia (I'm assuming this, I should look it up), if someone needs to buy a
phone they need to buy it from a corporate, the selling it directly is ofcourse
an individual but still it is made by a corporate and teh profits goes to a
corporate. I guess earlier all the entities people had to deal with say 100
years ago were tangible and local, maybe not, a university is an institution, a
government is an institution, you cannot point to a person or a group of
persons and say this is the university, this is the government so in that sense
they are a lot like the corporates and they had existed from quite a long time.


## Government Regulation

### Video 1 & Video 2

Insurance companies are usually corporates, as due to some catastrophy they
risk loosing all of the premium they have collected from people, investors in
the insurance company can only loose their investment and not more than that.
In certain countries under certain circumstances, it is mandatory for people to
buy an insurance. For example, employees have to provide health insurance, and
it is mandatory to buy third party car insurance. These insurances are
contracts, but they are not contracts which are freely entered into and freely
negotiated as government mandates, or writes, certain parts of the contract.
Prof Fried calls them "contract as taxation" or "contract as regulation" as
they fall between totally free contracts and totally mandated law like tax.

### Assignment Government Regulations

#### Question

Intermediate Form of a Contract

Oftentimes, the U.S. government regulates private industries for the benefit of consumers. For example, the U.S. Congress passed and President Barack Obama signed into law the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (“CARD Act”). Several of the main provisions address how credit issuers must interact with consumers, like a requirement that credit card companies give consumers 21 days or more to pay their bill from the date of mailing, and another that prohibits payment deadlines from falling on the weekend or mid-day.

First, consider why the government intervenes in private contractual relations. Second, make a normative judgment—determine whether you believe government intervention on behalf of consumers is the right approach, and include arguments justifying your position.

#### Response

The government intervenes in private contractual relations to protect citizens from interning into contractual relationship which can substantially harm them. I believe in many situations government's intervention on the behalf of the consumers is the right approach, there are several reasons:

1. Consumer may not be sufficiently aware of potential harms to negotiate a "good
   contract" with a corporation.

   Talking in terms of the Credit Card prompt, without the regulation, a credit card company might give a very short deadline for payment of bill or the deadline might fall on weekend which can be very harmful for the consumer. Ideally, if these factors are important, the consumer should negotiate a contract with the credit card company which takes these factors into account, I call such a contract a "good contract". Unfortunately, a typical consumer might not foresee these issues while buying a credit card, hence she might enter into a "bad contract" unknowingly. Laws like CARD Act prevent such harms.

2. A single consumer might not be in position to negotiate a "good contract"
   with the corporate.

   Second, because the consumer might want the money instantly, or because the consumer doesn't have sufficient training or resources to negotiate a "good contract". Taking advantage of this, the credit card company might put in terms which are harmful to the consumer. Also usually, there is no option for a single consumer to negotiate a contract on a credit card or some other product. Hence, regulation can be seen as a collective "negotiation" of a default contract with a company.

3. Regulations can increase efficiency by decreasing need of negotiation

    Third, even if an individual consumer is in a position to negotiate a "good contract" with the corporate, instead of expecting each individual citizen to negotiate contracts with an individual companies, it is more efficient if the government "negotiates" certain terms of the contract for citizens as a whole.


### Video 3 and 4: Mass Manufacturing, Government Regulation and Manufacturers

Nice, Prof. Fried talked about mass manufacturing. Suppose you buy a car, you
cannot negotiate every details of the car, there some choices but they are
standard and limited, also the contract for the purchase of the car is very
standard. It is not desirable or feasible for the company to negotiate a
contract with every single consumer. Hence the government negotiates on the
behalf of people with the manufacturers, to mandate certain parts of the
contract. It is contract because the manufacturers can say if this is the
regulation we won't produce anything at all.

Such intervention is not required in Business to Business (B2B) contracts.




## Questions and Thoughts


* Debt of a person is usually not passed on their heirs if the person dies, but
    the asserts of a person **are** passed on. Hmm.. X can take a lot of debt
    before X die, buy a lot of property for it, give it my children, and then
    promptly die. Well he has made free money for children.

Okay, reading Quora it looks like X's debt will paid off from his estate, also
there is a huge inhertence tax, so not maybe not worth it.

* What happens when a insurance company goes bust

## Unit Test


### Scenario 3

After successfully passing the Affordable Care Act, which requires
individuals to carry health insurance or pay a “tax” for failing to have
health insurance, the United States government decided to pursue another
program. This legislation, called the “Protecting Future Tort Victims Act,”
seeks to require every individual over the age of 18 to have general
liability insurance that covers any unintentional torts committed by the
policy-holder. Surprisingly to political commentators, the law passed and
individuals now must carry general liability insurance. Lola owns a farm
with many chickens, and often gives their eggs to her friends and
neighbors. Earlier this morning, while carrying a bowl with a dozen fresh
eggs, she tripped over a chair and dropped the bowl, causing the eggs to
splatter all over the kitchen floor. She negligently failed to clean up the
mess before Harrison stopped by to pick up eggs. He slipped and injured his
back. Lola did not have the requisite general liability insurance and was
fined by the government. In addition to the fines, she was required to pay
Harrison for the damages resulting from committing a negligent tort.

Short Answer, 2 Parts Now, assume that Lola (1) is organized as a
corporation, or (2) formed a partnership with neighbor Nelly. Who would be
liable in each of these situations, and is that a more or less desirable
result than imposing direct personal liability on Lola?

### Response

If Lola's farm is organized as a corporation, then she won't be personally for the committing a negligent tort. If she forms a partnership with Nelly, he neighbour then both of them will be liable for damages. Both of these less desirable than imposing direct personal liability on Lola because Lola's negligence was her's alone, she should not be allowed to escape the liability or offload a part of it to someone else because of the organization of her farm. We need to draw a distinction between acts done in personal capacity and act done as part of the organization.


# Book

## Duress

An involuntary contract or a contract under force is not enforcible.

If someone "gives" my consent to something through Aadhaar, is there a way to
take it back?
